Philip.
Philip. Grab a seat, Philip.
Thanks.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee, Philip.
We've set aside 10 minutes to hear your
submission,
so fire away.
I'd like to thank you very much for the opportunity to
appear before the committee today.
I welcome the introduction of the ACVM Amendment Bill
earlier this year. The regularity issues we have
described in our written submission are precisely the kind of
disproportionate outcome the bill was designed to address.
I want to highlight two provisions we strongly
support. First,
the bill allows the Director General to recognize
overseas regulators and take their assessments into account.
The products in our submission are already approved in the
UK, EU,
United States, and Australia.
Those approvals should carry weight in New Zealand.
We're not asking to lower the standards.
We are asking for the equivalent standards to be recognized
here in this country.
Second, the bill
gives the Director General power to exempt classes
of products from registration where the cost outweighs the risk.
These products are low risk, widely used, and approved in
every comparable market.
Full registration under the ACVM
Act is commercially unviable
for these products and it achieves nothing
in terms of safety.
The practical impact of the current interpretation is
significant. The cost of registering
a veterinary remedy medicine in New Zealand is
prohibitive for products of this nature,
and the process is extensive.
The result is that safe, widely used
products
are simply unavailable in New Zealand,
unavailable to New Zealand consumers and businesses, with no
corresponding benefit to animal, human, or environmental
safety.
A consistent and appropriate interpretation of the
Act would align New Zealand
with comparable regulatory systems and
restore access to products
that cause no harm and serve a genuine need.
We thank the committee for its time
and this opportunity to submit
our presentation
and we welcome questions.
Very good. We'll go straight to Mark Cameron,
who's online.
Is he still there?
He was.
Fell off the line.
You there, Mark?
I've got him.
We'll go to Steve while we find where Mark is.
Yeah, thank you.
Your point about the biting insect, the insect repellents.
Yes.
You say that they've been restricted on the grounds that
they've got
phrases and words like biting insects, repels or anxiety, and
that's triggering them not being allowed
in.
Yes.
And you say this interpretation extends beyond the intent of the
legislation. So do you think it's a problem of
an overly rigorous enforcement rather than the legislation itself?
It is a problem of-- Yes. It is. What
the situation is that
the product is designed to prevent the insect
from landing on the animal.
Yeah.
It's not designed to cure-
No
... if it hasn't been applied in the first place.
Yeah.
And that was what
the MPI
classification, it was classed as not exempt and needed registration
because these insects cause terrible harm to the animal.
Well, that is true, but if this product is put on first, then
the animal's not harmed.
Yeah. So I guess I'm trying to establish whether it needs a law change
or whether it just needs a change of directive in terms of how the law
is interpreted.
Yes. Well,
that one particular
product was we were importing, and we had it.
I've got samples here actually of two different label forms.
Yeah.
I can give you a copy. Sorry, I should've given them out first.
That's okay. Yeah.
Would you like to see a change?
Sure. Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you.
So the
product that was initially called louse powder referred to prevents
biting and
stinging insects from landing. So because of the
label referring to biting
insects, it therefore
needed to be registered.
Yeah.
Right.
And actually, this was the last time that we
went for MPI for the class determination, which was in
2024.
This
Vet Max one looks like it's just got eucalyptus and citronella oil in it.
Yes, that's correct.
So they're only repellents. And we're not asking for
insecticides. It is just purely for repellents.
And we've had to do changes of labels in more than one case, and there's more
cases there. In some cases, we've just, as I said,
it's prohibitive and not viable to bring in because it just isn't viable to bring
them in. So there's a lot of products that are on the international market-
Yeah
... for our industry, which includes a lot of
our main market as the equestrian market, and they're
just not available in New Zealand because we cannot bring them in.
Yeah.
And the cost
of our registering a product is
$100,000. And for a smaller industry, company, it's
just not viable.
Yeah.
And also the time it takes is a,
a lot involved, and it takes over at least a year to get something through.
Mm-hmm.
And the it just doesn't work.
Yeah.
Sue's had her hand up in the air.
Oh, just a random question. So is the reason you can put a fly on a can of fly
spray is because it kills the fly,
but this one, you can't do that because it's not actually killing the bug, it's
just-
The reason why-
... preventing it landing on them
... the reason why we had to change that was because
our,
the exemption changed to non-exempt, so
on that photo where it's got the two pictures, one with the flies on it and one
without. That was because in the country of origin, which is Germany,
part of the EU,
that's fine. That's absolutely perfect.
It doesn't actually
come under regulation.
But in New Zealand it came under regulation that because it referred
to biting insects, it had to be registered.
So we had to re-change the labeling for New Zealand to suit the New Zealand
market.
Mm-hmm.
Mark, you had a question.
You're on mute, mate.
Technical issues. Very grateful for your time this morning.
Just trying to ascertain how
frequently you work with the New Zealand Veterinary Council in
terms of the sanctioning of the things and products that you are talking
about.
And do you think they are
an exponent of the same kind of mindset that you're sharing
with us today?
So we work with the
MPI.
That's who we work through, and I also do have a private
regularity
advisor as well that I work with as well.
But that's not government, that's a private person.
The reason I ask the question, just very quickly as a supplementary,
is thinking of the endpoint user in this instance, and
too often, I think the user of the products that you're
speaking about
know that the sanctioning process is difficult.
They work with their veterinary people, which are saying the New Zealand Veterinary
Council is frustrated by this stuff, and I just thought
in your instance, you might be working hand in glove with
them.
We don't work with the
regulatory,
that you're talking about. We just work just
straight with MPI.
Okay. Thank you.
And we're just selling over-the-counter products. We don't sell...
Yeah, so all our products are over-the-counter products, so they're
not
prescription products.
Thank you very much. We've come to time, so I appreciate you taking the time to
come and present to the committee.
And thank you very much for your time as well. Much appreciated.
Thank you, Philip.
Thanks for the pictures too.
That is-
What you use for boxes.
Yeah. So next we have,
Mr. Robert Holmes and
Aliva Animal Health Limited.
Yep.
All right. Morning. Welcome to the committee.
Yep. Good morning. Yep.
You have 10 minutes, so, fire away.
Okay. Good morning, everybody. Thank you for the opportunity to be here and present
to the committee. It's a novel experience for me.
Firstly,
I hope my submission was at least clear on what it is that concerns
us.
I also want to make clear at the outset that Aliva supports the bill,
and its general thrust.
Will it solve all our problems? No.
But will it
help deliver more faith in the system and a little more speed to the regulatory
assessment process? We hope so.
But this has to be combined with giving ACVM the
necessary resources to do its work.
Over the 40 years that I've been working
with ACVM, I don't think I've seen a period or
a prolonged period where they are perennially short of staff.
Mm.
Constantly, they're battling to recruit new staff. We're a small country.
People like us, we hired one of their assessors recently.
So
when that happens, it takes them a long time to fill
those roles. So I think a lot of the frustrations we experience are
because of their constrained resources and the lack of people.
So I also want to say their job is critical to maintaining the
integrity of our food quality system and also
maintaining or opening the doors to 150 markets around the
world. Without the work they do,
our products would be shut out of those markets and
companies like us wouldn't have a
business. So their work is critical
Which brings me to the concern, or should I say quest for
clarity that I have with the bill.
This concern is around the recognized regulator
clause
and the implications of this.
On the surface, it's a great idea. Outsourcing the work to a subcontractor is
hardly a novel
concept. When you build a house, you do that, but you also want to make
sure that the quality of the contracted work is there.
ACVM also already does this with
accepting GMP certifications from
recognized regulators, so we make use of that.
We've had facilities
accepted in the US and other places based on the
assessment by APVMA in Australia.
So that's a very sensible and a relatively
concise
set of requirements that they work to.
But what seems to be proposed with this bill is to take
this to a whole new level,
which might be fine if we know what the level is, and I'm not sure
that
we do.
Is it the complete casting off of regulatory decisions
concerning product quality, or is it going to be something with
guardrails? That's not really clear in the bill.
The examples I showed in my written submission illustrated
that even with a highly respected regulator like APVMA, there
are pathways which are
noticeable for the brevity of the data that's required.
We ourselves have made use of that system, and I have to say,
the extent of a dossier needed for a generic is essentially three pages,
the product formulation, the release specifications, and the expiry
specifications. It doesn't go into detail about how you make the product,
about the degree of
heavy metals in the finished formulation.
There's a whole host of stuff that is not covered in that
category of registrations. I also think
APVMA have been lumbered with this
process, and they try and make the best of it, but they're constantly trying to
push it to make
the data
more comprehensive as required. But we've made use of it,
but I don't think it's a particularly good
pathway.
Now, it makes perfect sense that ACVM would
take selected reviews from recognized regulators for
complex things like new chemistry, and I understand
why some of the multinational companies in particular get frustrated with the
length of time it takes to get new chemistry approved.
We just can't hope to have the depth of resources
of organizations like the FDA, EMA, or the
EPA. So it makes perfect sense that we would rely
on their assessments of complex chemistry
and some of those cutting-edge products that our farmers and
growers desperately need.
But it seems with what is stated in the bill that there is a possibility the
use of overseas assessments will be far wider than that.
My submission is about making or asking the committee to
ensure that in the bill, there is clarity on what
types of decision pathways and decisions will be accepted
by ACVM.
We believe that it should be
stated that the data deemed acceptable for acceptance from an overseas
agency should be at least as equivalent as that needed
for an application were it to be made here in New Zealand.
And that's really the crux of my presentation.
All we want to know is to have a
concise and well-defined set
of
criteria by which to make
applications. And then we'll
go and do the work necessary to
follow those pathways. It may be that if a decision
involves a regulator overseas where the pathway is more abbreviated, then
we would naturally follow that pathway.
But that's the least desirable
sort of circumstance we'd want. We want a robust and rigorous
regulatory system in New Zealand that protects our food and
maintains our trade relationships with other countries.
So that's really the sum total of my presentation this morning.
So thank you.
Thank you. We'll go to questions. Steve.
Yeah, I
think your attention to conclusion is one of the strongest I've seen is that the
proposed amendments place undue emphasis on the identity of the overseas
regulator rather than the scientific standards and evidence
underlying the regulatory decision.
Mm-hmm.
Is there a risk that because so-and-so has approved it, we
approved it, because so-and-so has approved it, and then
C over here goes, "Well, you guys both approved it, so we've approved it too."
Without anyone going, "Well, what's the actual evidential
basis for this being-
Yeah
... a safe veterinary medicine?"
Yeah. Look, I'm not saying we should not accept overseas
reviews.
Yeah.
It's perfect sense. As I said, subcontracting is a very logical thing where you
haven't got the resources to do the job yourself.
Yeah.
But we want to make sure
that the standards that are applied are rigorous.
And for example, ACVM,
one of their hot buttons at the moment is looking at heavy metals-
Yeah
... and formulations. Well, that's
darn sensible and critical. It's a global standard that's been
adopted in human medicines, et cetera.
So we're having to scramble to do the work to do that, even on our
existing products.
Sure
Do we suddenly say, "Right, we're going to accept decisions based
overseas"?
Yeah.
And that may be legacy decisions where products were assessed 10 years ago, 20
years ago, just because they were from a recognized regulator.
No, we shouldn't do that. We should have well-defined
pathways that we all live with, and then we move on and try
and speed up the system, but maintain
those criteria.
Sure. Can I jump this up?
Yeah.
Is there also a risk that things that have been approved, as you say, 10 years
ago or 20 years ago, don't get reevaluated on the basis of new paths?
Well, in New Zealand, we do.
Right.
And I'm sure and overseas they do. So ACVM-
Yes, they do
... once again, every five years we are-
Rechecking things
... rechecked.
Right.
And we're brought up to date.
So ACVM are
very hot on that. Yeah.
So regulatory sovereignty and evidence-based
approvals notwithstanding that if
the evidence is that an overseas regulator has done a thorough job of
assessing that on grounds that we're content with, we can use what they've
discovered.
Yeah, provided with the same rigor as applied here.
Yeah.
Yeah. That's the case I am making. Yeah.
Thank you.
Mark had a question.
Yeah. Morning, everyone.
Is it true that there's an
intrinsic link between sanctioning for approval the use
of various products,
and how they are ubiquitous in other countries, and yet we might
not be able to use them here?
Do you think it's a case of, as you say, less so about the
chemistry of the product and more of the
relationship we strike with the regulator in other
jurisdictions to ascertain credibly, yes or no,
that their standards would apply here in New Zealand?
Well, look, I have no problem that there are a lot of competent
regulators around the world. Of course, there are.
But some of them have been perhaps lumbered with these regulatory pathways,
maybe due to political pressure or whatever,
where the standards aren't necessarily the same for certain
categories of products that they are here.
So as I said, I want to have a
clearly defined set of standards that
we live with here, that we also accept that the dossiers
from overseas that have been assessed overseas meet those same standards.
That's all I'm saying.
Right. So
we're really trying to ascertain the credibility of the regulator from offshore,
aren't we? That's what this comes down to.
Well, no.
It's not, because you can't tell me that APVMA in Australia aren't a credible
regulator. It is more about the pathways that
some of them... Now, we've had dossiers in Australia approved
both ways. We've had them do full assessments on
new products, and they're extremely rigorous.
Very rigorous.
But then on the other hand, they have other pathways where
the set of
assessment standards aren't there.
They're relying on, I guess, maybe post-assessments
with GMP to pick up problems. But
that's more of a hit-and-miss process. Will they pick them up or not?
Yeah, so look, I am not here to cast stones
at any other regulator.
No.
I guess what I'm saying is the pathways that are acceptable for New
Zealand acceptance should be identified.
That's separate from saying, APVMA, EPA, whatever, is a
great regulator. Of course, they are great regulators. That's not what I'm saying.
Yeah. I just-
But the behavior is-
I wonder whether you think there should be a commissioned authority that had a
specific role in creating and being
the sanctioning process for what is
acceptable as a pathway and what is not.
Well-
Another layer, as it were
... ACVM are the experts on what is acceptable.
They've already got very clearly defined guidelines for what is acceptable.
All they need to do is say, "Right, the pathways
in those other jurisdictions have been followed, and they've followed
the same set of criterion guidelines that are accepted in New Zealand.
They're not abbreviated."
Thank you. We've come to time, Mark.
Yeah. Sorry.
We're well over time, so.
Brief me.
Look, yeah. And thanks for your time today.
Thanks.
It was miserable.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Next, we have the deer industry, Deer Industry New Zealand.
Let's get it.
We've got Rhys Griffith. Very good.
Yes.
And then Neil Murphy, I take it.
Yeah, that's us. Yeah.
Very good. All right. Well, you see how it goes. We've got 10 minutes.
Away you go.
Excellent. Thank you. Kia ora koutou. It is awesome to be here.
It's a great chance to remind ourselves that New Zealand has the
only farmed deer herd of scale in the world, right, which
offers us a unique position in that global protein market.
And also awesome diversification for our dry stock farmers in terms of pasture
management, and also diversification with income.
We support these bills, but we think they need more.
The reforms to exemption notices,
research consents, overseas assessments pathways are good improvements, and we
agree with that direction. But for us, efficiency gains in the regulatory
process doesn't solve the underlying problem for
our sector.
The overseas assessment provision is probably less useful for our
sector than maybe a lot of people might realize.
For sectors like the pig industry,
for them, on that global stage again,
overseas reliance pathway is a good step forward.
So we congratulate that. However, for us, it's got limited practical
application. As I started this talk, we are the only ones in the
global stage, so there isn't a similar dossier sitting in North
America or in the European Union.
The most relevant existing scientific pathways will generally be from
comparable ruminants. One of the important messages
I wanted to get across.
So we ask to broaden Section 20 to allow
comparable species reliance with appropriate safeguards.
We're not asking to reduce the standard, but for the law to reflect how
science and risk assessments should work.
I just want to touch briefly on the triple drench, triple
combination drench as a good illustration of the problem.
So,
deer farmers were faced with a choice of either continued use
of a single active combination, risking
resistance, or off-label uses, inconsistent and
improper dosing being an issue there, and also withholding
times. Neither is really acceptable for us as an industry that want to market
a premium food product out there in
a market that expects the best animal health treatment.
The only reason why a registration for triple drench exists
today is the work that Deer Industry New Zealand has done, and there's been that
kind of that gap within the system and that's what we're seeking to address.
Fact, discretion is not a pathway.
The new director general exemption power under Section 8AA
is an important tool to manage novel issues.
But expecting discretion to manage a set of established issues could be
problematic. We are asking the committee to recommend that minor
use and small species access to be specifically called
out in the bill, so that a clear and transparent
criteria can be applied and that those can be approved.
I want to talk just quickly about ACVM and HASNO
alignment, that it shouldn't be a technical footnote.
If the committee does recommend a fast-track minor use pathway under the
ACVM bill, but the HASNO or
hazardous substance and new
organisms contains no equivalent
pathway, then we'll only have approved half that process for
us. We're asking the committee to treat alignment as a substantive recommendation,
not as an afterthought, please.
Our ask is specific. We're not asking for a subsidy, we're not asking for a
reduction in safety standards. We're asking for targeted channels, all of which can
fit within the framework of these bills.
One, minor use category. Two, broader species comparability.
Three, a streamlined label variation route.
Four, proportionate research consent costs.
Five, time frames on the face of the act.
And six, HASNO alignment.
We are genuinely unique to New Zealand, generating
$330 million in export revenues with a desire to, well, with a
plan to get to 660 over the next nine years now, and a desire
to get to be much more than that, and no equivalent international
regulatory context to draw on. We think it's a reasonable ask.
Thank you, and we welcome questions.
Very good.
Yeah. Great.
Steve.
Sure.
In terms of the ACVM HASNO pathways, would
it be easier if there was some sort of one-stop shop?
So you've got a product you want to get approved, you go to the
regulator, and the regulator decides where it has to be
assessed rather than having to make independent
applications to both.
That's a great question, Steve.
Yeah. Yes.
A single point of entry always makes it a lot easier
on this end of the-
Yeah
... of the regulation with the government. Yeah.
And do you think that
it's still okay to have two pieces of legislation, or do you think they should be
combined ideally? That's not going to happen now, but more
broadly.
I wouldn't
want to tell Parliament how to do its job, right?
It's a design-
Well, everyone else does.
If we have a gun, we'll listen.
It's a design choice, right? There's pros and cons with both.
Okay. Yeah.
But I think where legislation intersects, it's
really important that we think about that we have a
nice contact surfaces and not jagged.
So the previous submitter talked about
some of the pathways in some of the jurisdictions that we would
be looking at
equivalency with,
had some,
well, in his opinion, some flaws. What's your
opinion?
Well, he has much more experience of working with those
pathways.
We haven't really spent
time looking into that level on overseas
regulators.
I think that the point for us is the standard that the ACVM
sets. It's the standard we should meet for a product.
What we're looking for is flexibility to utilize a
wider set of scientific knowledge to be able to
demonstrate that.
Can I just clarify? You get-
Yeah.
Yeah, sure.
Dana.
Yeah. I was just wondering if you could expand a little bit on your comments
around Section 8AA,
which is the
exemption clause.
I note in your submission you talk about
the regulations made ask the committee to consider recommending the
bill allow for proportionate assessments by including an explicit
minor use or small species category for food-producing animals.
I just wonder, could you just give me an example of what that looks like
in the deer industry or in whatever industry it might also apply
to?
So,
I think there's a recognition to say,
and I haven't kind of drafted and I don't have kind of-
It's okay
... legislation in mind as such, but it's around saying, "Hey,
here is a-"
A sector that doesn't have, and it might be deer or it might be
some llamas or camelids or something like that
we want to use,
and say, "Look,
it becomes an unreasonable burden given the size of the commercial
market to do the full
collection on the species in New Zealand to do." So what
we're saying is, at least for those ones, there should be an allowance
to say, "Okay, well, we understand what happens in cattle, we understand what
happens in sheep. Here is why that's a relevant
comparison in this case." It's not always.
There's a lot of variation between species.
So it needs to, the actual paperwork or the actual science need to
actually recognize that. But it's being able to say that
we can do those comparisons rather than build a full-on VOCO
based on New Zealand research on New Zealand deer.
Does that make sense?
Yeah, that makes sense. Yep.
It's clear.
No, I think it's pretty clear. Because your point is that
it's just not viable to do that full assessment on a
unique instance where you've got
captive deer farming and other jurisdictions don't have that.
Yeah.
Any further questions?
No.
All right. Very good. Thank you. Thanks very much.
Thank you.
Thank you, Rich and Emil.
Thanks.
Next up, we have
Life Sciences Network Charitable Trust, Dr.
William Rolston, and Nathan Mills is online.
Now, this is a bit unique because you are going to be talking about both
the ACVM and the HASNO Act, kind of confusing
of all bills. So,
when you come to question,
I suggest you identify which act you're talking
about.
Yep.
So fire away.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
My name is William Rolston. I'm Chair of the Life Sciences Network, and with me
online is Mr. Nathan Mills, our Executive Director.
Relevant to the submission, I trained in medicine, operate a large sheep and beef
property, and manufacture veterinary medicines, including live
vaccines. I was a founding chair of the Biotechnology Industry
Organization, a past president of Federated Farmers, a former acting
president of the World Farmers Organization, and in 2007,
I was a specialist advisor to this committee for the report
on the importation of plant germplasm.
The Life Sciences Network has represented the interests of science and industry in
this area since 2000.
We research and educate on matters related to the life sciences, and in particular,
our aim is to improve scientific literacy and hold those who
misrepresent science to account.
We thank you for the opportunity to
submit on both bills, which we support.
Agricultural compounds, veterinary medicines, and organisms used in agriculture are
the backbone of the industry, and thus of our
economy and our way of life.
There is a revolution occurring in biology through the understanding of the genetic
code, the interaction of chemicals, including proteins, with
biological systems.
AI is helping us design new and more effective drugs and
compounds, and to improve breeding programs.
Only last month, I acquired a machine that fits in the
palm of your hand, can read the genetic code of an organism in hours, and can be
plugged into the cell phone.
In 2007, the Primary Production Select Committee report on the
importation of plant germplasm observed that the application
process was expensive, difficult, and time-consuming, and
importation conditions impossible to meet.
It says something that it's taken two decades to see some of these
issues being addressed. We are living in a fast-changing world, our
access to information is exponential, and we must find new ways to keep
pace while maintaining risk below acceptable levels.
It is not a trade-off between risk and speed, and I think these
amendments achieve these dual outcomes.
These amendments do not open the floodgates on new chemicals, new
organisms, nor GMOs.
Reading between the lines, I suspect officials had hoped the Gene Tech Bill had
extracted GMOs from the HASNO Act and it would get a clear run through this
process.
It's interesting to see that even minor modifications of the HASNO Act
get pushback from the very people who implored
government to do just this rather than passing the Gene Tech Bill.
These amendments, in our view, are practical improvements which take us
some way to unlocking opportunity for the primary sector.
We note the HASNO Act continues to treat GMOs more conservatively than new
organisms with respect to containment, applications, assessments, and
decision criteria. This does not meet the aspirations of
risk proportionate.
Should the Gene Tech Bill fail, these shortcomings will need to be addressed.
We support the delegation of decisions away from the noise of politics and into the
quiet science-based consideration of the regulator, bound by
guardrails to ensure decisions are objective and evidence-based.
In the same vein, we support the discretion given to the regulator to apply
risk-appropriate principles when determining the level of
consultation, noting that public interest is a key
consideration, and enabling more effective approval pathways.
We support the use of overseas data and approvals in the assessment process
across both acts. Finally, we implore you as a
committee to use the science resources available to you so that your
decisions can be well-informed. And I'm happy to take any questions.
Thank you very much, William. Right, we're going to Mark Geoghegan first.
Good morning, William. Always lovely to see you. Sorry to be online.
How do you square up public perception and the need
for science- Which is constantly in a state
of evolution to move forward in
so much that a sanctioning process- ...
is not fueled by emotion, but by
clear line of sight
in regards to what should be approved here in New Zealand.
And if it's approved offshore, why do we have to have
necessarily an onerous system here?
That's a very good question, Mark.
I think that's your job as politicians.
But it comes down to education and the
importance,
public understanding the important role that science
plays. If we look at the
approval pathways for medicines, for example,
within the Medicines Act, nobody's saying that those
decisions need to be made by politicians.
They need to be based on science, evidence, and safety.
And I think it's up to all of us
to
bring the public up to speed, to show just how
important it is that these decisions are evidence-based and not
simply based on politics.
Yeah, absolutely. Thank you.
Steve.
Good to have you, William.
Nice to see you.
Yeah. What's your take on the
labor
submission that the proposed amendments in the ACVM
Act place undue emphasis on the identity of the overseas
regulator rather than on the scientific standards and evidence
underlying the regulatory decision?
I think the first thing is that we need to keep it simple.
And I listen to that with interest, but
it just becomes too complicated,
from what I understand-
Mm
... trying to say, well, we accept this regulatory pathway and not that regulatory
pathway, and how is that all going to work?
I think what we got to look at was what are the outcomes.
If it's a competent regulatory authority and it behaves in a competent way,
the pathways
actually are not as relevant.
So I think
when
our
authorities are looking to approve an overseas authority, then they should
look at the competence of that authority, not necessarily the pathways.
So we're looking at outcomes, not processes.
I think that's
one thing we've got tied up with in
looking at new organisms and genetically modified organisms in particular.
We're looking at the processes, not the outcomes.
That seems to contradict your point about it being a scientific,
evidential-based position. It seems to say-
No
... if the regulator's the right variety, we'll accept what they decide rather than
look at the actual evidence on which they made that decision.
Well, I'm talking about evidence, I'm talking about the outcomes that that
particular authority would
display. And
if you're looking at,
is this pathway equivalent to us? No, what we want to know is, is the
outcome equivalent to what we would expect?
And if that's a competent authority that's doing that,
then I think
that is reasonable. For our company, for
example, South Pacific Sierra, which is not submission from South
Pacific Sierra, but
we make
products which are approved in Europe, and they're approved in Europe
because we have equivalency across, New
Zealand and Europe have equivalency.
So things that are approved in New Zealand,
in terms of manufacturing, are approved in Europe.
That makes it a much simpler exercise.
For the FDA, I've got FDA
people coming over to do inspections.
That is inefficient and expensive.
I'll do one final on that. But the
equivalency is the
extent of the evidential basis. Surely, that's what you
mean. The reason we are happy with accepting what Europe's
decided is because we're confident in the
extent to which their-
Correct
... decision is based on evidence.
Correct.
And if there were pathways that we thought were
totally inadequate,
then I would assume that the-
Sure
...
regulators would not accept that as a competent authority.
If they thought there were weaknesses, that would not pass the
test.
But shouldn't we also just be doing that check on the evidence on which they're
basing it? It might be a very quick check, and we might be able to-
Absolutely, and I think there always needs to be a provision that
there are unique situations in
New Zealand-
Yeah
... that we need to look at. I don't think that
completely overrides. I'm not
suggesting that we
carte blanche on those things. I think there's always a final
consideration, but I-
Yeah
... would not want to see the act complicated
by
separate pathway. We accept this pathway, but not that pathway,
et cetera. I think that would
make it complicated. It just takes up time and it leads to mistakes.
So, just thinking.
That final consideration that you're talking about,
you think in the past it's been a political decision, not a
scientific decision, that's been the main driver of
that final decision?
In terms of
the
regulator making decisions, I was more referring to
decisions about
Whether an organism, for example, is a new organism or not a new organism.
And that's been delegated into
the regulator. And I think that's the right thing to do, because
that is a scientific decision,
not a political one.
Yeah. Okay. Mark?
Yeah. Thanks, Miles. Extrapolating out,
William, what just
has been spoken of both by Miles and Steve,
we're talking on the one hand about science and then on the other hand about
political will. Because if we've got a trade relationship with
another nation where both parties have sanctioned certain
products,
but the said new partner that we're trading with has other
relationships where the same products are not sanctioned, can you
see how political will is then in this
tension of, well, we accept it here with
this partner, but
can't trade with the other partner, and this is the battle that we're having?
That because we don't have
a set of rules that are universal,
that we become sort of entangled in the
approval process of other nations as much as our own.
I'm not sure I quite get the tenor of the
question, but
the decisions about whether an overseas
authority is a competent authority or not is not a political one.
It's one made by the regulator.
Mm.
So our trade
negotiations, et cetera,
in my experience, do not
put in there your regulator is competent or not.
And even if it were, that would be
highly based on-
Well, I just make the point, William, there were certain products that we're
sharing, say between, I won't use Australia because we've got the
health and safety,
sorry, the Food Act that has been-
Yes
... sanctioned between the two countries.
I'm thinking more of the US or Great Britain,
that have other relationships where they might have approval process
which isn't sanctioned and yet we've approved it.
And I just think, does it become a political football unless it's a scientific
one?
Sanctioned by whom, Mark? I'm just not quite sure.
Okay. Well, I think we'll leave the line of questioning.
I'm concerned, Miles raised a point.
It's such a point. Did the science get blurred by
politicians that didn't understand the process?
Yes. Well, and that's why
this needs to be within the purview of the regulator.
Sorry, Mark.
So,
Steve, to that point,
completely outside of the politics of it,
is a gene-edited organism a genetically modified
organism, just on the basis of the science?
Science
doesn't make those distinctions.
What is a genetically modified organism is
a political construct.
So,
if you talk to scientists, they will say there's no such thing as a
genetically modified organism or not, it's just these are techniques that we use.
So those labels are political labels.
And just to illustrate your point,
when the
High Court
ruled
in the case with the Sustainability Council about
whether gene editing was genetically modified or not,
in that case, the outcome of that ruling was
that most of our vegetables and fruit were genetically
modified organisms.
No one said anything for 18 months while the rules were changed,
but
legally,
we were all eating genetically modified organisms until the regulations were
changed. So it is a construct. And if you're looking at
gene editing as we go forward, and we've seen that the Europeans have
changed their
rules on what is
a GMO and what isn't. The organic industry will continue to say that
gene-edited organisms are GMOs. So it just depends on who you're talking to.
Can I just slightly challenge you on that, insofar as-
Good. You've got five seconds, Steve.
In the process of doing science, you have to work out how to
categorize different methods of intervention.
So I'm not sure that it's exactly correct that it's a political decision.
Scientists are saying, "This is
genetic engineering. This is genetic modification.
This is in vitro modification. This is hybridization." I
think there has to be some ability for us to characterize and categorize
things, and scientists do that.
Yeah. Those are shorthand labels.
But if you're talking about
hybridization as a technique-
Yes
... CRISPR as a technique-
... TALEN as a technique.
Those are handy labels.
Genetically modifying or
genetic modification or
gene editing are
shorthands. If you ask about genetic modification, you'll have
one person who says that
gene editing,
the transgenics, et cetera, is all genetic modification.
You'll have someone else who says, "We've been genetically modifying plants
for 10,000 years."
But they've got different risk profiles.
Steve, that's it.
We're out of time, mate. Sorry.
But thank you very much.
That was the juicy bit.
Yeah.
Thank you very much, William, for your-
Thank you. Very interesting. Thank you very much
... Nathan, even though you didn't get a chance to say anything.
See you space.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
And I'm pleased I'm this far from a new organism seat.
Carrie.
Yes, I'm moving further down the table now. That's fine.
Susan and I are doing well here.
Yeah.
Look, the committee's going to go into private session now.
It's the last of the-